Category LEGAL
Sub-Category PEP L
Name David CAMERON
Gender MALE
Country Links
Nationality New Zealand
Country Location Solomon Islands
Country Location New Zealand
Location Details
Street
City Honiara
Region Guadalcanal
Postcode
Country SOLOMON ISLANDS (SLB)
Street
City Wanganui
Region Manawatu-Wanganui NI
Postcode
Country NEW ZEALAND (NZL)
Street
City Wellington
Region North Island
Postcode
Country NEW ZEALAND (NZL)
Positions
Judge - District Court
Entered Date 08-Apr-2011
Updated Date 13-Apr-2011
Update Categorization C3
Judge of the District Court of Wanganui (Apr 2011 - ). Judge of the High Court of Solomon Islands (circa Feb 2007 - Nov 2010).
Married. Father of 3 adult sons.
	PEP - Local Government
Wellington man appointed Judge after returning from Solomon Islands
April 6, 20110 comments
News release from NZ Government
Wellingtonian David Cameron has been appointed a District Court Judge, Attorney-General Christopher Finlayson announced today.

Mr Cameron was admitted to the bar in 1976. He recently returned to New Zealand after four years in the Solomon Islands where was a High Court Judge presiding over criminal and civil trials. He participated in the Judicial Orientation Programme in New Zealand in 2006 and Australia in 2009. From September 1999 he was a sole practitioner.

He was a partner in Morrison Kent, Wellington for 17 years where the emphasis of his practice was on civil and commercial litigation. He regularly appeared in the Palmerston North High Court for the defence in jury trials involving indictable charges.

The new Judge will be sworn in at Wellington on 13 April and will sit in Whanganui.
District Court Judge appointed

Wellingtonian David Cameron has been appointed a District Court Judge, Attorney-General Christopher Finlayson announced today.

Mr Cameron was admitted to the bar in 1976. He recently returned to New Zealand after four years in the Solomon Islands where was a High Court Judge presiding over criminal and civil trials. He participated in the Judicial Orientation Programme in New Zealand in 2006 and Australia in 2009. From September 1999 he was a sole practitioner.

He was a partner in Morrison Kent, Wellington for 17 years where the emphasis of his practice was on civil and commercial litigation. He regularly appeared in the Palmerston North High Court for the defence in jury trials involving indictable charges.

The new Judge will be sworn in at Wellington on 13 April 2011 and will sit in Whanganui.
Wellington Lawyer Is High Court Judge in Solomons

Friday, 2 February 2007, 1:54 pm
Press Release: LawFuel

For IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Wellington Lawyer Appointed High Court Judge in Solomon Islands

LAWFUEL – Wellington, New Zealand - The Net’s Law News Network - Chief Justice Sir Albert Palmer welcomed a New Zealand Judge to the Solomon Islands High Court.

Justice David Cameron arrived at a time when the Solomon Islands High Court crucially needed additional judges to preside over a backlog of high profile cases currently pending in the country’s courts.

Sir Albert was pleased with the addition of Justice Cameron saying his contribution will enhance the performance of the law and justice sector in the country.

“Justice Cameron brings with him a wealth of regional experience from New Zealand as a senior legal counsel and will be wonderful addition to the Bench at a time when his contribution will be most appreciated,” Sir Albert said.

Justice Cameron is the fourth expatriate judicial officer appointed by the Judicial and Legal Service Commission with the assistance of funds provided through the RAMSI Law and Justice Program.

He joins Justice Goldsbrough of the United Kingdom, Justice Naqiolevu from Fiji and Commissioner Lewis from Australia.

The judges’ role would focus primarily at the significant number of ethnic-tension related criminal trials now pending before the High Court.

Sir Albert said the appointment Justice Cameron comes at the most crucial time.

“At a time when backlogs in the nation’s courts are rightly of a real concern to both the Judiciary and the Government, the appointment of an additional donor-funded Judge of the caliber of Justice Cameron is both timely and welcomed,” Sir Albert said.

Justice Cameron will commence his first trial in the country on February 5 when the first stage of RAMSI-funded renovations and extensions to the High Court provide and additional court room and associates’ facilities.

Justice Cameron was educated at Scots College in Wellington, where he was dux of the college and has worked in various legal firms since 1974.

His positions before coming to Solomon Islands have included roles as a senior litigation partner and legal consultant and he has extensive criminal and civil trial experience.

Now married with three grown sons, Justice Cameron spent his formative years traveling the world with his family as his father was a mining engineer with Shell Oil. He has visited Solomon Islands in the past as a tourist.

Justice Cameron said he was prepared to take on his task to assist Solomon Island Law and Justice Sector.

“I’m hoping to make a worthwhile contribution during my time here at the Solomon Islands High Court,” he said today.
Fisheries Minister and Member of Parliament for North Malaita, Jimmy Lusibaea has been remanded in police custody after pleading guilty to unlawfully wounding a person and assaulting a police officer.
During his High Court trial yesterday morning, the North Malaita MP pleaded guilty to unlawfully wounding a Robert Solo and assaulting police Officer Sam Manakeha at the National Referral Hospital on the 1st of September 2000.

Mr. Lusibaea, who initially pleaded not guilty to the charges, made his guilty plea only after the Crown's second witness Officer Manakeha gave evidence in Court. Manakeha told the High Court that he was on duty at the National Referral Hospital during the early hours of the 1st of September in 2000 when Lusibaea, accompanied by his co-accused Patterson Saeni and a group of men came to the hospital carrying guns and pistols looking for a Robert Solo.

Solo had reportedly been involved in a shoot out between members of the Malaita Eagle Force (MEF) at the Heron's Nightclub that night. Three militants of the MEF had been shot during the shoot out and were admitted at the hospital.

Solo was later severely beaten up by MEF militants and was also admitted at the National Referral Hospital that same night. Officer Manakeha said he had escorted Lusibaea and his group to the x-ray area of the hospital where Solo was lying in a hospital bed. He testified that Lusibaea then shot Solo at close range in the kne with a pistol.

On charges of assaulting a police officer, evidence of the crown says Lusibaea had also hit Officer Manakeha during the incident.

High Court Judge David Cameron ordered that Lusibaea be remanded in custody until his next appearance on the 24th of November next week.
