GETTY New Zealand Prime Minister John Key said the UK has forgotten its history

Mr Key launched a scathing attack on David Cameron after the pair’s discussions at the nuclear summit in Washington DC last week. His main concern with Britain’s loyalty to the 28-member bloc is with the immigration system which prejudices against non-EU member nations.

GETTY Mr Key also claimed that the UK has preferred the EU over its relationship with New Zealand

He also believes that it has stopped the UK recruiting skilled labour from the commonwealth in exchange for hiring cheaper migrant labour from Eastern Europe. He told the New Zealand Herald: “I said to him I thought no one individual action of itself is so incredibly significant but the combination of them is adding up to a picture which looks as if they are forgetting the history between our two countries. “I said to him it was an amazingly strong and warm relationship and Britain is still our number one source of migration.

GETTY New Zealand is hoping to improve its trade deal with the UK

Why should we be penalised for the migration policies of being part of Europe? John Key

“We are at the core… a British colony and I thought there was an argument that New Zealanders could be treated in a way which reflected that.” Following the meeting, Mr Key said the British Prime Minister assured him he would “have a look” at his concerns. He added: “We are migrants who have always pulled our weight in the UK and why should we be penalised for the migration policies of being part of Europe?”

But the prime minister said earlier this month that Britain is stronger as part of the EU. He said: "We certainly think it's a stronger position for Britain to be in Europe.

GETTY But New Zealand pledged its support to UK remaining the EU last week
Image copyright AFP

The prime minister and first minister will meet to discuss UK government support for a buyer for Port Talbot steelworks.

It comes amid reports of potential buyers for the plant where thousands of jobs are at risk after Tata Steel said it was selling its UK operations.

The government says it is ready to offer help to secure a purchase.

David Cameron and Carwyn Jones will meet on Tuesday to discuss the situation.

It will come a day after assembly members meet to discuss the crisis during a specially-reconvened debate on Monday.

Mr Jones has called on the UK government to give the British steel industry the same support given banks during the financial crisis.

Writing in The Independent this weekend, Mr Jones said there was "a moral, economic and strategic case" to do the same for steel.

Business Secretary Sajid Javid said the government's plan to save the plant - and industry - was to find a commercial buyer for all of Tata's UK businesses.

Media caption Sajid Javid: "I will do everything I can to keep this plant open"

Speaking on the BBC's Andrew Marr show, he said the government's plan to save the plant - and industry - was to find a commercial buyer for all of Tata's UK businesses.

"We're going to also have to offer support to eventually clinch that buyer and to give this steel plant a long-term viable future," he said.

A source close to steel tycoon Sanjeev Gupta, founder of commodities firm Liberty House, confirmed he had been in contact with the government as a possible buyer for the Port Talbot steelworks, which employs 4,100 people and is said to be losing £1m a day.

The source told the BBC the discussions had not been substantive yet, but Mr Gupta is due to arrive in the UK from Dubai this week and would be seeking further talks on the issue.

Tata announced plans last week to sell its loss-making UK plants. Unless a buyer can be found, thousands of jobs are at risk.

The business directly employs 15,000 workers and supports thousands of others and includes plants in Port Talbot, Rotherham, Corby and Shotton.

It also has sites in in Llanwern and Newport, Shotton in Flintshire and Trostre in Llanelli.

German steelmaker ThyssenKrupp has also been touted as another potential buyer, according to the Observer.

Meanwhile, the UK government said all public sector bodies would be required to think about the impact of using foreign steel for construction projects, in a bid to encourage buying British steel.

Ministers have faced criticism for failing to take more action to prevent the "dumping" of cheap Chinese steel - selling it cheaply at a loss - seen as one of the key reasons for the problems in the UK steel industry.

The Welsh Government said a task force was already looking at supporting the steel industry through public sector contracts in devolved areas.

UK steel crisis

Image copyright Reuters

What's going wrong with Britain's steel industry?

Tata Steel UK: What are the options?

Is China to blame for steel woes?

The Welsh Liberal Democrats say there are still questions for the first minister to answer about the Welsh Government's handling of the situation.

They point out that two of the things the steel industry have called for - action on business rates and public sector procurement - are in the hands of Welsh ministers.

A Welsh Conservatives spokesman said: "We are pleased to see that the UK government is taking steps to reform procurement rules to give UK steel a fair chance and that is a step the Welsh Government should also consider, along with offering business rate relief."

Jonathan Edwards, Plaid Cymru MP for Carmarthen East and Dinefwr, said: "Wales cannot go on with a government with such abject lack of ambition and which is willing to idly stand by rather than stand up for our vital steel industry."

Mark Reckless of UKIP Wales added: "The government has done next to nothing to save our steel or protect workers in Part Talbot and beyond."


The Brexit campaign group backed by the justice secretary, Michael Gove, is trying to persuade senior NHS staff to sign a letter that includes a direct attack on David Cameron, who is accused of having starved the health service of funding.

In an email leaked to the Guardian, Vote Leave’s Cleo Watson tells clinicians that her group desperately needs doctors, nurses and pharmacists to warn that Britain’s health service is being damaged by the EU.

A draft version of the letter included by Watson says: “David Cameron and Jeremy Hunt must accept responsibility for this – they have starved the NHS of necessary funding for too long.”

She says in the email that the letter will be published on Monday to mark the start of a week in which “out” campaigners will focus on NHS issues such as cost, patient care and safety, immigration and EU directives.

The inclusion of a line directly criticising the Conservative leader has triggered a furious reaction among some of the party’s MPs because Vote Leave has Gove, the London mayor, Boris Johnson, and cabinet ministers Priti Patel and John Whittingdale among senior committee members.

The letter describes the health service as a great British institution that families rely on. “But as it slips into financial crisis the NHS itself needs some urgent attention. The NHS is being asked to make huge cuts at a time of rising demand. Patients are having to wait longer for treatment, hospital deficits are increasing and doctors are on strike after being told they must take a pay cut,” it says, claiming that Brexit would hand billions back to the service.



Related: EU referendum: 250 business leaders sign up as backers of Vote Leave

”Remain” campaigners accused Vote Leave of changing its position on the NHS, arguing that the group’s chief executive, Matthew Elliott, had supported spending cuts, opposed ringfencing of the NHS and proposed more privatisation in the past.

James McGrory, a spokesman for Britain Stronger in Europe, said: “You cannot trust Vote Leave with the NHS. They are people who have spent their political lives championing policies which would destroy the NHS as we know it.

“It’s rank opportunism for them to now don the clothes of protectors of the NHS.”

A Vote Leave spokesman rejected the claim, arguing that the NHS was struggling because of EU membership. “If we Vote Leave we can stop handing over £350m a week to the EU and can instead spend our money on our priorities like the NHS,” he said.

A senior Department of Health source hit back by claiming the government had provided an additional £10bn for the NHS and said that “every Conservative MP stood on a manifesto to deliver this package”. They added: “So we expect every Conservative MP to have absolutely nothing to do with this letter.”

In an increasingly fierce battle over Britain’s future relationship with the EU, which is causing stark divisions in the Tory party, the source claimed that independent experts had said Brexit would cause an “economic shock”.

It follows an article by Hunt that was branded as scaremongering by out campaigners.



Cameron and Gove have tried to maintain a strong relationship throughout the referendum campaign, despite Gove’s decision to campaign vocally for Brexit. There are claims that the prime minister has started ignoring ministers campaigning to leave, but Downing Street sources say the justice secretary is still invited to sessions in which Cameron prepares for prime minister’s questions.

Nick Herbert, the chairman of Conservatives In, called on the party’s MPs and ministers to “distance themselves from this wholly unacceptable attack on our party”. “I find it hard to believe that any senior Conservative would want to be associated with direct criticism of the prime minister and our achievements in this crucial area, not least ahead of local elections,” he said.

Cameron, who was attending a summit in Washington on Thursday and Friday, said his encounters with other world leaders had underlined the fact they believed Britain’s best interests lay in remaining in the EU. “What I find is it’s very hard to find a leader of a friendly nation that wishes Britain well, that believes we would be better off outside a reformed EU. I had some brief discussions about this with Prime Minister Modi [of India] last night and we will have further conversations with him today.”

Related: Vote Leave releases list of serious crimes by EU citizens in Britain

The prime minister’s comments came as another leading figure linked to Vote Leave told the Guardian he would like to see the entire EU project dissolved.

Nigel Lawson, a former Tory chancellor, said: “Well you could say that once upon a time it served a useful purpose, in confining Germany. You could make that case – and I really bought into this in the 50s. But it’s passed its sell-by date; it’s served its purpose.

“I see no purpose in the European Union now at all. I think that if it ceases to exist we’ll have better relationships.”

Lawson argued there was more hostility between European countries now than there had ever been at any time since the second world war.

“The great majority of people in Europe do not want to be part of a political union,” he said.



Asked about the impact the referendum was having on his party and whether Cameron’s premiership was a price worth paying for Brexit, he said the prime minister had “already said he’s going to stand down”.

Lawson argued, however, that Cameron had a duty to remain in place with his cabinet in the aftermath of an out vote in order to implement the people’s verdict in the most effective way.



FULL TEXT OF THE LETTER

From: Cleo Watson

Date: 29 March 2016 at 13:36:03 BST

To: undisclosed-recipients:;

Subject: Urgent call: Doctors

Dear Colleagues

I hope you have had a restful Easter.

Next week is the Vote Leave NHS week, when we will be hitting a number of issues that affect staff and patients, including cost, patient care and safety, immigration, EU Directives and TTIP.

We will be publishing a letter on Monday from respected doctors, nurses, pharmacists and so on and we desperately need you to suggest any clinician contacts that you may have. It would obviously be great to kick off the week with a really strong list to accompany the letter, the draft text of which is below.

If you could forward me the details of any current or retired healthcare workers I would be incredibly grateful.

Best regards

Cleo

The NHS is a great British institution that families rely on in times of need. But as it slips into financial crisis the NHS itself needs some urgent attention. The NHS is being asked to make huge cuts at a time of rising demand. Patients are having to wait longer for treatment, hospital deficits are increasing and doctors are on strike after being told they must take a pay cut. David Cameron and Jeremy Hunt must accept responsibility for this – they have starved the NHS of necessary funding for too long.

If we Vote Leave on 23 June we will be able to spend more on our priorities like the NHS. If we put the billions that currently go to EU bureaucrats into the NHS instead it would hugely improve patient care. For example, the £350 million a week we hand to Brussels is similar to the entire yearly Cancer Drugs Fund budget.
Security officials fear Islamic State is plotting to use drones to spray deadly nuclear waste over British cities.

The threat is considered so real that David Cameron and Barack Obama last night held a ‘war game’ session on how to respond to such an attack – which could kill thousands and leave a target town or city uninhabitable for years.

Aides said the drones could be purchased easily on websites such as Amazon and there was already evidence of IS trying to use them.

The Prime Minister said: ‘We know the terrorists we face today would like to kill as many people as they possibly could, using whatever materials they can get their hands on.’

Scroll down for videos

Fears have been raised that ISIS could use drones to spray nuclear waste over British cities (file picture)

President Obama and David Cameron discussed a response to such an attack at a nuclear summit in Washington, US, pictured

At a nuclear terror summit in Washington, world leaders held a planning session, complete with TV footage of fictitious news broadcasts, to prepare for a drone attack.

In the scenario, terrorists managed to steal nuclear material from a health facility and smuggle it into Britain and other Western countries. Some was detected by the intelligence agencies but other consignments got through.

The toxic material was purchased by jihadists on the highly encrypted ‘dark web’ after being stolen from the health site.

Security officials are said to believe this is an increasing possibility. Drones – such as those used to dust crops – were then used to spread the lethal material.

A UK official said: ‘We have already seen Daesh [IS] trying to look at [the question] can they get their hands on low-level crop-using-type drones.’

Speaking before war-gaming what was dubbed a ‘doomsday scenario’, Mr Cameron told the Mail: ‘So many summits are about dealing with things that have already gone wrong and we are trying to put right.

‘This is a summit about something we are trying to prevent.

Surrounded by world leaders, President Barack Obama gave the peace sign at the end of a nuclear security summit today

The US President is pictured with fellow world leaders including Mr Cameron and French President Francois Hollande at a meeting during the nuclear summit

‘The issue of nuclear security and the security of nuclear materials, particularly when it comes to the problems of international terrorism, the concept of terrorists and nuclear materials coming together – which is obviously a very chilling prospect – and something in the light of the Belgian attacks, we know is a threat that is only too real.’

The warning comes a day after the PM announced hundreds of extra armed police will patrol regional cities amid fears of a Paris-style mass-casualty gun attack taking place outside London.

Officials are planning how best to respond to an attack in which fanatics target separate sites at the same time, as in Paris in November when more than 100 people died.

Security sources said that, while seven mass casualty attacks had been stopped in the past year, it was inevitable that one would get through.

World leaders 'war-gamed a doomsday scenario' at the summit in Washington DC in the US, pictured

President Obama, left, speaks to Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite, right, as Mr Cameron, centre listens in on the conversation

The two terrorist attacks which have claimed lives in the UK over the past 11 years have both been in the capital – the 7/7 bombings and the murder of Lee Rigby.

But major terror plots have been uncovered in other cities.

In a sign of how seriously the threat of a nuclear plot is being taken, it last night emerged that American commando units have been trained to seize and disable nuclear or radioactive bombs.

The Pentagon rarely discusses publicly its plans to use commandos if terrorists obtain a nuclear weapon or build a ‘dirty bomb’ from radioactive material.

Yesterday, Defence Secretary Michael Fallon announced £40million will be spent on a new cyber security operations centre to protect the Ministry of Defence.

Last week’s attacks in Brussels have raised fresh concerns about the prospect of nuclear terrorism.

Greater Manchester Police are getting dozens more armed officers after the Prime Minister announced a boost to counter terror squads in the wake of attacks in Paris and Brussels.

David Cameron, speaking at a meeting of world leaders in Washington, said there will be 400 additional firearms officers ready around the clock to be deployed to cities outside London, including Manchester and Birmingham.

The ‘significant’ increase is in addition to a nationwide fleet of extra armed response vehicles.

Mr Cameron said: “Our police and intelligence agencies work round the clock to keep us safe and it is absolutely vital that we support them with the right resources and kit.

“After the terrorist attacks in France last year, we decided to look at whether there was more we could do to protect people from the type of terrorist threat we now face.

AP Photo Prime Minister David Cameron

“That’s why we are increasing the number of specially-trained armed officers up and down the country, to make sure the police have greater capability to respond swiftly and effectively should they need to do so.”

Last year the M.E.N reported how GMP launched an advertising campaign to increase the number of qualified marksmen and were also training riot and traffic officers so they can be called upon to use a gun during major incidents.

The latest announcement came after a Government review of the capacity and capability of Britain’s police forces to act in the event of “complex” attacks, similar to the massacre at satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in January 2015, the simultaneous strikes launched in Paris in November 2015, or the recent bombings in Brussels.

AP Photo/Peter Dejong Police in Paris after the terrorist attacks by so-called Islamic State in November last year

GMP have yet to confirm the number of officers, but they are expected to be in place within the next 12 months.

Downing Street said the beefed-up network is intended to complement military contingency plans already in place to deploy up to 10,000 troops in the event of a terror attack.

The new recruitment drive aims to have 1,000 more armed police in place across England and Wales by spring 2018, which also includes the 600 extra armed police officers in London announced in January.

An additional 40 armed response vehicles will bring the total number across the country to 150.

Simon Chesterman, the National Police Chiefs’ Council lead for Armed Policing, said: “This additional uplift will ensure we are in an even stronger position to respond quickly and effectively to protect the public.”

