Category POLITICAL INDIVIDUAL
Sub-Category PEP N
Name Rt Hon David CAMERON
Gender MALE
Date Of Birth
09-Oct-1966
Country Links
Nationality United Kingdom
Country Location United Kingdom
Location Details
Street
City Chipping Norton
Region Oxfordshire
Postcode
Country UNITED KINGDOM (GBR)
Street
City Witney
Region Oxfordshire
Postcode
Country UNITED KINGDOM (GBR)
Street
City London
Region Greater London
Postcode
Country UNITED KINGDOM (GBR)
Place Of Birth
London, United Kingdom
Title Rt Hon
Positions
Prime Minister
Entered Date 16-Jun-2001
Updated Date 20-May-2015
Update Categorization C4

The question put to David Cameron about his late father’s offshore trust was both precise and wide-ranging. A day after the Guardian revealed that an offshore investment fund run by Ian Cameron has paid no UK tax since it was established in the 1980s, a Sky News correspondent took advantage of an appearance by the prime minister in Birmingham to ask:

The leader of the opposition has called for an investigation into your tax affairs for your own interests. Can you clarify for the record that you and your family have not derived any benefit in the past and will not in the future from the offshore Blairmore Holdings fund mentioned in the Panama Papers?

David Cameron avoids question on benefiting from father’s tax affairs
PM sidesteps issue of whether he benefited in past from assets revealed in Panama Papers, saying he has no offshore trusts, funds or shares
 Read more
The reporter, Faisal Islam, chose his words carefully. He did not ask if Cameron was benefiting from the trust now. Instead, he asked if he had benefited from it in the past, or would in the future. And he did not just ask about Cameron personally; he asked about Cameron and his family.

Cameron replied equally carefully:

Sure. Look, the investigation we need, first of all, is for HMRC, our tax authority, to use all the information that is coming out of Panama to make sure that everything is done, to make sure that companies and individuals are paying their taxes properly...

In terms of my own financial affairs, I own no shares. I have a salary as prime minister and I have some savings, which I get some interest from and I have a house, which we used to live in, which we now let out while we are living in Downing Street and that’s all I have. I have no shares, no offshore trusts, no offshore funds, nothing like that. And, so that, I think, is a very clear description.

Let’s be blunt. David Cameron didn’t answer the question Islam asked.

The prime minister did his best to avoid sounding evasive (note that “sure” as he begins) and his answer went on for some time. But, on the subject of his finances, he gave a narrow (and no doubt carefully rehearsed) answer: he does not own shares, does not have money in an offshore trust or fund, and the only income he receives comes from his salary, some interest and rent on his house.

He did not talk about other members of his family. And he did not say whether he might have benefited from money from the trust in the past.

At a press conference, reporters would have had the chance to press him repeatedly for answers on these points. But Cameron almost never holds proper press conferences in the UK. His preferred modus operandi is to take just two or three queries from reporters; the rest of the questions come from more deferential members of the public. Today is a good example of why.


The stories you need to read, in one handy email
 Read more
And yet, Cameron will probably get away with this. He plays the media well and has a good sense of how to say just enough to satisfy people (or at least those people willing to give him the benefit of the doubt) without admitting anything too incriminating.

As I write, the Guardian’s website is leading with the headline “Cameron ducks question about benefiting from offshore trust”, while the Mail Online’s version is more generous: “David Cameron denies he gets any income from his late father’s tax haven company.”

Downing Street later issued a statement saying Cameron’s wife and children “do not benefit from offshore funds”. The statement read:

To be clear, the prime minister, his wife and their children do not benefit from any offshore funds. The prime minister owns no shares.

As has been previously reported, Mrs Cameron owns a small number of shares connected to her father’s land, which she declares on her tax return.

Again, that statement does not refer to the past or the future.

Of course, if Cameron had tried to answer Islam’s question in full, where would he have stopped? Does “family” mean just his wife and children? Or his siblings, and their children too? And how far back into “the past” should he have to go in terms of telling us whether he ever benefited from Blairmore?

As a Conservative party official in his 20s Cameron bought a flat in a smart area in Notting Hill and drove a BMW (a “battered” one, according to one of the Cameron biographies). Presumably his father helped him out. But none of us are responsible for our parents. Cameron has never pretended to be anything other than privileged and he must be calculating that, on this, he has opened up as much as is necessary.