Dolphy Kohu has been remanded in custody until September after being charged with attempted murder.

Photo: RNZ / Alexander Robertson

The 23-year-old appeared in the Whanganui District Court today on charges of attempted murder, and using a firearm against a police officer, following a huge police manhunt in the central North Island yesterday.

Five others, who have been charged as accessories, sought name suppression but Judge David Cameron refused it.

They are Hereina Paul, who is 22; Hemi Kohu and Melissa Vaka, both 17; and Aroha Kohu, 39.

Carlos Bushell, who is 28, has been charged as an accessory after the fact.

Photo: RNZ / Alexander Robertson

Melissa Vaka and Aroha Kohu.

Photo: RNZ / Alexander Robertson

Those five have been remanded on bail, and all six accused will appear in the Whanganui District Court on 9 September.

Seventh arrest today

Police arrested the final person being sought over yesterday's manhunt this afternoon.

Central District Police have confirmed the 24-year-old man who was being sought was arrested at an Ohakune address shortly after midday today.

He has been charged with unlawfully getting into a motor vehicle and being party to using a firearm against a law enforcement officer, and will appear in the Whanganui District Court tomorrow.

Six people, including Dolphy Kohu, were taken into custody yesterday.

Dolphy Kohu, another man and a woman were arrested at 9.20pm yesterday at a road block at the junction of State Highway 1 and State Highway 49. Police said a number of firearms were recovered from the vehicle.

Three other people were arrested earlier that day.

About 2.30am on Wednesday, police began chasing a vehicle near Whanganui. In the hours that followed a police vehicle was rammed, shots were fired at officers and a police car was briefly taken.
A convicted child sex offender has breached his extended supervision order for the fourth time in as many years.

David Edwards, who is not allowed to enter or loiter near schools, playgrounds, parks, or any other place children are likely to congregate, breached the order by walking through a Wanganui park.

Edwards, who pleaded guilty to the breach, was convicted of unlawful sexual connection with a girl under 12 in 1996 and convicted of the same charge again, as well as indecent assault, in 2007.

The 68-year-old is considered to be at high risk of reoffending, Judge David Cameron said in the Whanganui District Court yesterday.

In August 2011, a 10-year extended supervision order was made.

Since then Edwards has breached the order three times, not including the most recent offending on April 19, when he entered and crossed Wembley Park on his way to the dairy.

For one breach in 2012, he was sentenced to 18 months in prison, Judge Cameron said.

Edwards also has convictions for breaching home detention conditions.

Continued below.

Related Content Three men accused of murder to remain in jail until trial Murder accused to stay behind bars until trial

Judge Cameron said he had received a letter from the Prisoners Aid and Rehabilitation Society, saying Edwards lived alone in accommodation he would lose if sent to prison.

"The manager advises if that were to happen then, once released from a term of imprisonment, he would come out with literally nothing," Judge Cameron said.

"He would have to dispose of his furniture and other possessions ... it would be exceedingly difficult to re-accommodate him."

Defence lawyer Debbie Goodlet called the offending a "low-end breach". Judge Cameron said he would not describe it as such, "because he is at high risk of reoffending and this condition, of course, is to protect children under 16 years".

He said the breach "must be treated seriously by the court".

"Having regard to all the circumstances of this offending, I will give this defendant one last opportunity."

Judge Cameron sentenced Edwards to six months' home detention.

"I warn Mr Edwards formally that if there were any further breaches of his extended supervision order, then he can expect a significant term of imprisonment."

An argument over the state of a Whanganui couple's relationship led to the man choking his partner.

Hohepa Cadwallader and Hine Whareaorere began arguing about their relationship on July 27, and words soon turned into Cadwallader wrapping his fingers around his partner's throat.

Judge David Cameron said Cadwallader pushed Whareaorere on to the bed, then held her against a wall when she tried to get away. When he let her go, Whareaorere walked out of the room, and the argument turned to custody of their 3-month-old child.

She tried to grab the baby from Cadwallader, who refused to hand the child over, so she went outside and smashed Cadwallader's car windows with a wheel brace "in an effort to force him to hand over the baby".

Cadwallader's mother then took the baby, Judge Cameron said.

The fight between Cadwallader and Whareaorere continued, with Cadwallader punching her in the face and knocking her to the ground.

Another argument erupted between the couple on September 2, this time about money, the judge said. Whareaorere threw a bowl at a nearby wall, and Cadwallader punched her in the nose, causing it to bleed.

"The victim tried to hit back, but kept missing," Judge Cameron said.

Whareaorere left the sleepout they were in, then returned to find Cadwallader throwing her washing out the back window. She found an axe and swung it at Cadwallader, but he managed to catch it and force her to the ground. Cadwallader then dragged Whareaorere across the floor by her hair, at which point her sister intervened.

A short time later, Whareaorere tried to take the baby from Cadwallader, who refused. She then assaulted him with a mug, and he put her into a head lock, forcing her to the ground, Judge Cameron said.

Cadwallader strangled his partner until the sister again intervened. Once the sister left, Cadwallader again put his hands on Whareaorere's throat and squeezed for about 30 seconds, until the sister again saw and intervened.

Cadwallader held Whareaorere in a bear hug, and she bit him on the arm, after which he tried to again strangle her, but failed when Whareaorere scratched his face. He then stomped on her head, which the sister saw.

Cadwallader pleaded guilty in the Whanganui District Court on Thursday to assaulting with intent to injure, and male assaults female, while Whareaorere pleaded guilty to wilful damage.

Cadwallader's defence lawyer, Harete Hipango, said her client "faces the court fully cognisant of a sentence, whatever the sentence may be". She said he felt "deep remorse" for the offending. He has no criminal history.

Cadwallader told Hipango "that he needs to learn and deprogramme from what he has been exposed to".

She said the couple loved each other and were committed to working on their relationship, and attending programmes to help. Cadwallader is 22, while his partner is 20. The pair had a Restorative Justice conference, and have both agreed to attend a family violence programme.

Cadwallader was sentenced to 150 hours' community work and nine months' supervision, while Whareaorere received a nine-month supervision term.
Whanganui woman accused of leaving child in car overnight

MURRAY WILSON/FAIRFAX NZ The woman, who appeared in the Whanganui District Court, allegedly left a baby in a car overnight.

A Whanganui woman is accused of leaving her baby in a car overnight, then dealing Class A drugs while on bail for that alleged offence.

The 29-year-old woman appeared in the Whanganui District Court on Tuesday, facing various charges.

Police say she was taken away from a locked car on Boxing Day 2015, because she was intoxicated and needed to be stopped from driving.

However, she apparently did not tell officers the baby was in the car.

According to court documents, that means she allegedly failed to provide the necessities of life, as leaving the baby in the car was "likely to cause adverse effects" to the child's health.

The woman was granted bail on January 7, but alleged to have taken part in criminal activity between then and Tuesday.

She is charged with offering to supply methamphetamine on January 15, then actually supplying it the next day.

Both those charges carry a maximum punishment of life imprisonment.

She has also been charged with offering to supply cannabis, driving while suspended, and leaving a child younger than 14 at home without proper supervision – all allegedly taking place between January 10 and 15.

Duty lawyer Anna Brosnahan said the woman had only recently been assigned a lawyer, who needed time to go over the file.

Judge David Cameron remanded her in custody until later in January.

SIMILAR CASES

The alleged methamphetamine dealer is not the first person to be taken to court for leaving their child in a car.

A Whanganui mother was discharged without conviction in 2015, after her 16-month-old son died after being left in a hot car on January 16 that year.

While she pleaded guilty to the manslaughter of her child, Justice Simon France decided a conviction would be out of all proportion to the offending.

Feilding man Wayne Ricardo Schwamm hit the headlines in 2013 after he left an 18-month-old boy, who had a heart condition, in the back of a car while he went into Wellington massage parlour Splash Club.

He was fined $200 after pleading guilty to leaving a child younger than 14 without supervision. The maximum penalty was $2000.

He said he had gone to the parlour to pick up a friend so they could discuss a domestic matter with the boy's mother, but had to stay for some time after finding out his friend had to work overtime.

Schwamm ended up in prison in 2014, after admitting a late-night sexual violation of a woman in Palmerston North.

- Stuff
A man who asked two girls to have sex with him for money and performed an indecent act in front of them has been handed a prison sentence.

Brent Alan Johnston, who races greyhounds, was at the races on March 6 last year when he met the victims, who were 13 and 15 years old.

Johnston, then 50, offered to buy the girls beer, and told them to come back after race two, Judge David Cameron said in the Whanganui District Court yesterday.

When the girls came back, Johnston took them to his car.

The 15-year-old asked him to drive them to Porirua, Judge Cameron said.

As there were dog cages in the back, one girl climbed into the passenger seat and the other one sat in the passenger footwell.

"While driving with the girls in his car, the defendant learned that they ran away from a CYFS family home."

He also learned they were short of money, Judge Cameron said.

About 20 minutes south of Whanganui, Johnston pulled the car over and the girl in the footwell moved into one of the dog cages.

Johnston then offered to pay the girls for sex, and both refused.

He then offered to pay them to perform oral sex on him, but they again refused.

Johnston performed an indecent act while sitting in the driver's seat, Judge Cameron said.

Johnston told the girls to watch him and said he'd give them $20 if they did.

One of the victims began to cry.

He dropped the 15-year-old victim at a service station and headed back to Whanganui with the other victim.

He began asking the girl "sexualised questions" including asking if she liked sex.

Johnston drove the girl to her grandparents' house before returning home to Foxton, ending what had been a 400km round trip.

He pleaded guilty to two counts of performing an indecent act on a female aged 12-16, and two counts of encouraging an under-18-year-old to provide sexual services.

Judge Cameron said Johnston had previous convictions from 1982 to 2013, including a previous conviction for encouraging an under-18-year-old to provide commercial sexual services.

He received a sentence of 100 hours community work for the crime back in 2013.

According to victim impact statements, both of his new victims felt angry with Johnston.

One said she had issues of trust with people as a result of the incident, while the other had "lost confidence" and "at one point had thoughts of self-harm".

Johnston was assessed as being at medium risk of harm to others, and in his pre-sentence report attempted to "minimise" his actions by saying the girls were encouraging his behaviour.

"I don't accept that for one moment, and the summary suggests quite the contrary," Judge Cameron said.

He sentenced Johnston to 12 months in prison, with six months of release conditions.

The judge gave him a strike warning under the three strikes law.
A man who smashed a car with a golf club while a family with a baby was inside has been sent to prison.

Uriah Te Rauma Te Rangi Mariee Ponga lashed out at one of his victims on January 3.

The victim went to Ponga and asked for $40 he was owed, Judge David Cameron told the Whanganui District Court on Tuesday.

"No, I'm broke," Ponga replied, to which the victim said: "Come on, I need the money."

When the victim looked away, Ponga punched him three times in the head, knocking him to the ground.

"The defendant stood over him and continued to punch him before stomping on him numerous times in the head, arm and leg regions," Judge Cameron said. The victim managed to get up and climb out an open window and run to his car, which had a crying baby in the back seat.

The victim told his partner to get in but, before he could get away, Ponga came out of the house and carried on punching him in the head through the open driver's door.

Ponga then grabbed a golf club and chased the car, smashing two windows, including the one above the baby, Judge Cameron said.

"The defendant claims not to have known that children were inside the car."

Ponga pleaded guilty to assault with intent to injure and wilful damage. He also pleaded guilty to two unrelated charges of breaching a protection order.

The first arose from an incident on December 3, when Ponga was arguing with his off and on partner of 10 years.

"The defendant went outside and started screaming and yelling abuse," Judge Cameron said.

He went to another door and tried to get back inside the house, and began kicking it when he couldn't.

On December 20, an argument started between the pair when the victim accused Ponga of smoking P.

Ponga verbally abused the victim before picking up her keys and taking a key to her workplace off the key ring.

He refused to leave the house, although the victim told him to "numerous times".

Judge Cameron said Ponga had an "extensive" criminal history. He sentenced Ponga to six months in prison with six months of post-release conditions, and ordered him to pay reparation of $500 to the first victim.
By Melissa Nightingale

A truck driver who crashed while working has lost his job after it was found he was over the breath alcohol limit.

Wallace Henry Sanson was driving a truck carrying sand and towing a trailer on January 19 when he crashed on a "moderate bend", police prosecutor Sergeant Stephen Butler said.

Sanson was driving east on Tayforth Rd when he crashed, Mr Butler told the Whanganui District Court on Tuesday. A breath test showed him to have 525mcg of alcohol in his system. The legal limit is 250mcg. Sanson told police "it started rocking and I over-corrected and it rolled", Mr Butler said. He pleaded guilty in court to driving with excess breath alcohol, third or subsequent. Defence lawyer Richard Leith said Sanson's previous convictions were "quite some time ago". He said the vehicle was "difficult to control" because it contained sand.

Judge David Cameron sentenced Sanson to 100 hours of community work and disqualified him from driving for 12 months.

- Wanganui Chronicle
A woman who stood in front of a police car to give her friend time to escape has been jailed for obstruction.

Tione Emma Topp was a passenger in a car near Taihape on November 17 when police driving behind activated blue lights and sirens.

The car driver initially pulled over but then accelerated away, Judge David Cameron told the Whanganui District Court.

The car turned down another road and came to a stop, with Topp getting out and running towards the pursuing police car. Topp stood in front of the car trying to block it as the other car accelerated away, Judge Cameron said.

"In other words, she was assisting the driver to evade police."

The police car edged past Topp and give chase, while more police turned up and arrested Topp.

A 17-year-old who was scolded by a judge for gesturing his objection to the summary of a crime he had earlier admitted has vowed to change for the better.

Hoani Royden Junior Check asked to make that point when he appeared before Judge David Cameron in the Whanganui District Court on Tuesday for sentencing on charges of robbery, theft and aggravated assault.

Those charges were laid following two episodes of thuggery that occurred within the space of four days in 2012.

The first incident took place about 5.50pm on August 25, 2012, when Check encountered his 16-year-old victim on the Aramoho Rail Bridge walkway.

The victim and his two friends were crossing the bridge as they made their way to Aramoho and walked past Check and his male associate while doing so.

The summary of facts states Check or his associate called out to the victim when he was halfway along the walkway. The victim stopped and turned to see Check pursuing him.

Check walked up to the victim and, with his fists raised and clenched, demanded his shoes. He told the victim if he refused to hand them over, he would give him a hiding.

Check's claw hammer-wielding associate then approached one of the victim's friends, pushed him up against a walkway barrier and demanded the guitar he was carrying.

Finally, Check insisted the victim hand over his cellphone, which he did.

Check and the associate, whom he refused to identify, then walked away towards Wanganui East.

On August 29, 2012 an intoxicated Check and several associates descended on Trafalgar Square shopping centre, where Check attempted to steal a pair of shoes that were on display at Number One Shoes. He was thwarted by a staff member.

Check moved on to the shopping centre's Countdown supermarket, and while he purchased items at the store, another of his associates stole a $7.99 bottle of wine, which Check hid down his pants.

Members of the public witnessed the fracas that resulted from Check being stopped and questioned by a Countdown employee about the stolen wine.

Check reacted angrily and punched the staff member before lifting the wine bottle over his head. The supermarket worker managed to move out of the way and the bottle smashed as it hit the ground.

It was during the reading of this second incident that Judge Cameron told Check he could "gesticulate ... all you like" but those were the facts he had pleaded guilty to.

Check's lawyer, Stephen Ross, told the court his client had a difficult upbringing. Check's father was a gang member.

But Mr Ross said there was potential for Check to turn his life around.

A sentence of community detention, as opposed to home detention, would allow him to access the support he needed to rehabilitate, Mr Ross said.

Crown Solicitor Lance Rowe sought community work and reparation be handed down as well.

Judge Cameron said Check's pre-sentence report was poor. It pointed to a sense of entitlement, problem-drinking, a propensity for violence, limited self-control, an unstructured lifestyle and few positive influences.

"You haven't got a good role model at all, and no doubt that is part of the reason for the way you act," Judge Cameron said. However, there came a time when people needed to make their own way, he said.

On one count of robbery, Check was sentenced to six months' community detention and six months' supervision, while on two counts of theft and one of aggravated assault, he was sentenced to 150 hours' community work.

Check was also ordered to pay reparation for the wine and stolen cellphone, $7.99 and $200, respectively.

Judge Cameron warned Check if he breached the conditions of his sentence, he would "almost certainly" be imprisoned.
