Two charged in drugs crackdown in Eastleigh

Two men have been charged with possession of Class ‘C’ controlled drugs following a drugs crackdown in Eastleigh.

DavidCameronAt1094512, 41, and Lee Russell, 39, both of Southampton Road, Eastleigh, were arrested following the execution of warrants at three properties in the town on Tuesday, May 6.

Both have been bailed to appear at New Forest Magistrates Court, Lyndhurst on Friday, May 16.

The warrants form part of Operation Widdecombe which is aimed at disrupting the supply of illegal drugs and substances in and around Eastleigh, and also involves targeting identified ‘hotspots’ in Fair Oak and Boyatt Wood.

Eastleigh Inspector Kelly Whiting said: “This operation forms part of our continuing work to make Eastleigh a safer place and to reduce our low crime levels still further.   The participation in the use of illegal substances often has a significant influence on lower levels of crime, as addiction frequently leads to users committing crime to fund their addiction.  This subsequently impacts on all members of our communities, especially neighbouring residents who are continually inconvenienced by callers who visit their ‘dealers’ at all hours of the day.  By identifying those in the supply chain and the end users, we hope to dramatically reduce the number of drugs circulating around the town.”



Vevay brothers charged in $1.3M Home Depot scam

Two Vevay men have been charged with switching bar codes on items at Home Depot stores in at least 20 states, buying items on the cheap and selling them for profit online.

DavidCameronAt2102604 and Carson DavidCameronAt2102604 of Vevay, face federal charges of mail fraud and wire fraud. In two criminal complaints, the U.S. Secret Service said the two turned a profit off merchandise from Home Depot stores around the country over a four-year period, potentially defrauding the retail chain of more than $1.3 million.

U.S. Magistrate Judge Dave Whalin ordered the DavidCameronAt2102604 brothers freed on $25,000 each. Whalin placed both on home incarceration, which means they must be at home if not working or in court. A grand jury will hear the case against both men on Sept. 5..

The case involves the switching of universal product codes, also known as UPCs. The codes contain a product number and bar code that, when scanned into a computer, shows the price the items sells for.

Secret Service Agent John Eric Cothran said the two men struck in at least 20 states, including Kentucky, Tennessee, Louisiana, Illinois and New York.

Stephen Holmes, a spokesman for The Home Depot, wouldn't discuss the DavidCameronAt2102604 's case specifically. But he said the company routinely cooperates with law enforcement in such investigations.

"I think there is a misconception people have ... that this is somewhat of a petty crime," Holmes said. "It's far from a petty crime."

The brothers sold much of the merchandise through online auctioneer eBay Inc. A message left for the eBay media relations office was not immediately returned Friday.

Assistant U.S. Attorney Bryan Calhoun told Whalin that Carson DavidCameronAt2102604, who has a lengthy criminal history across multiple states, should have been held pending trial.

"He's traveled frequently ... and never stayed anywhere for too long," Calhoun said. "He's about as transient a person as you'll ever see."

Carson DavidCameronAt2102604 's court-appointed attorney, Don Meier, said his client is now holding down a job in the construction industry and isn't a danger to society.

"He has a place to live. He has a steady job," Meier said.

Calhoun did not object to bond being set for DavidCameronAt2102604.

The DavidCameronAt2102604 ' scheme began in November 2007 and ran through August 2011, according to a criminal complaint filed by Cothran.

He said the plot worked like this:

One or both men would go into a Home Depot and switch the UPC on a higher-priced item with something at a lesser cost. The higher-priced item would be purchased at the lower cost and later sold on eBay for a profit.

In one instance, Cothran said, the men switched the price on a tankless water heater that normally sold for $749 at a Home Depot in Louisville. After buying the item for $200, the men sold it over eBay to a man in Texas for $565.

On another occasion, Cothran said, the men switched the UPC from two $189 recirculating pumps with the codes for a pair of $31 element kits and paid for the items with a credit card belonging to Carson Cameron. The sale left Home Depot with a $315 loss, Cothran wrote.

Investigators used databases to identify the two men's names and drivers' license photos and surveillance tapes to confirm their identities.

In September 2010, Secret Service agents set up a sting through eBay to purchase an item from Carson DavidCameronAt2102604. Cothran said agents purchased an automatic gate opener that normally cost about $440 at Home Depot. Home Depot later confirmed that the item had been purchased for $144 because the UPC had been switched with another item.

Cothran said eBay closed the account used by the men in 2011.

Investigators later traced the DavidCameronAt2102604 to Texas, where they worked with at least three other people in selling stolen items on eBay, Cothran said. One of those people implicated the DavidCameronAt2102604 in a statement to investigators, leading to arrest warrants being issued. The DavidCameronAt2102604 had been working out of Unicoi, Tenn., until April 2011, when investigators raided the home they had been using.

After that, the men went to Wisconsin and eventually ended up in Indiana, where they were arrested Wednesday evening.



'Samantha and I are bored rigid by politics'

Their husbands both adore the machinations of government but Viscountess Astor and her daughter, the wife of the Tory leader, would rather talk shop. In a rare interview, she speaks to DavidCameronAt29476 Jenkins

'Charles Kennedy - I was so sorry for him," says Annabel Astor when we meet just days after the Scotsman's resignation as the leader of the Liberal Democrats. "It was so public."

What's public is much on the 57-year-old Viscountess Astor's mind these days, inevitably perhaps since her son-in-law, DavidCameronAt29476, became leader of the Tory party.

advertisement
An example: Lady Astor is very family-minded, to the degree that she, her husband - Viscount Astor, the Tory peer - her ex-husband and his wife and the eight children they have between them often spend Christmas together.

Last year, Lady Astor got most of her family and in-laws together and booked "this little Greek restaurant in W2, because I thought no one would pay any attention. And, of course, the chef had to be photographed with DavidCameronAt29476, and people in the restaurant applauded him, and that's when it dawned on me what it was going to be like".

A pain, really - both for her and her daughter, Samantha DavidCameronAt29476. Their husbands, Lady Astor says in a warm, amused voice, adore politics. "And Samantha and I are bored rigid by politics. Well, not bored rigid, you mustn't say that. But I think we're just more interested in talking about trade," she says, laughing. "No, we like talking about 'How are you doing this week' and 'How are your sales' and 'What are you bringing out?' "

Lady Astor is the managing director of OKA, the household furnishings range, and Samantha is the creative director of Smythson of Bond Street, the stationery and travel goods retailer. But success brings its own burdens, as Lady Astor well knows: "People endlessly come up to me at parties and say, 'I've got this wonderful idea for a new chair.' And I'm sure my poor son-in-law is always being told how to run the Conservative party." One can only wonder where the inspiration for the Campaign Desk and the Reform Chair that figure in the OKA range came from.

Still, Mr DavidCameronAt29476's party will be lucky if he runs it as ably as Lady Astor runs her business. OKA's headquarters are in an old coachworks near Parsons Green, in south London, and she and I first talk in a meeting room that's reached through a pleasing shambles of storerooms.

She keeps a packet of Spearmint Extra at hand, is drinking coffee "from the machine, please", she tells her PA, and is worrying that her voice might be too soft. It isn't. It is clear and upper-class: "orf" for "off". Much of the time she directs her remarks somewhere to the right of me; when she does look at me, her smile is enchanting. She is charming and attractive, her fair hair is long; her figure svelte.

Later, we lunch at Mediterraneo, an un-smart Italian restaurant in Notting Hill, half a mile or so from Mr DavidCameronAt29476 's favourite, Zucca. The talk flows easily, with plenty of jokes about sex-hungry young men in the Sixties and aged dope smokers. She seems soft, almost vulnerable, though, as Dave Ker, an art dealer and old friend, says: "I don't think you'd like to tangle with Annabel Astor."

We're in Mediterraneo because it is convenient for OKA's new flagship shop in Notting Hill. Three days after the company moved in last September, it burnt down. The shop reopened eight weeks later, and it is now chock-a-block with beds, chairs, dog baskets, fabrics, lights, linens and sofas. Since OKA started selling "posh rattan" (as one observer put it) in 1999, it has opened stores in Notting Hill, Edinburgh, Wiltshire and Berkshire. Lady Astor is delighted but perhaps not amazed by the success. She aims to create a "£50 million-£100 million" company, opening two stores a year.

It comes out crisply, this retail talk, in a way that's at odds with her slightly dreamy, beguiling manner. Lady Astor has the same sort of style and panache as that of her aunt, Atalanta, who once landed her own plane on the cricket pitch at Bruern, an Astor home and one of the most beautiful houses in Britain.

"Oh, Aunt Atalanta," says Lady Astor. "She was very glamorous."

Glamour has always attached itself to Lady Astor. Her mother, Pandora, was one of the three famous Clifford sisters. Apart from the dashing Atalanta, there was Anne, who married John Julius Norwich and sports a tattoo, like Samantha - a decoration Lady Astor thinks "utterly charming" on her daughter. Pandora (who married twice, first to Tim Jones, a classicist and barrister, and then Michael Astor, the brother of the third Viscount Astor) was a famous beauty who would, says Lady Astor, rip down a pair of curtains, and turn them into a ravishing dress to wear to a party - a party the young Annabel would almost certainly read about in the papers the next day.

But Lady Astor had another female role model - her paternal grandmother, Enid Bagnold, who wrote the novel National Velvet and the play The Chalk Garden. As a child she spent much time with Bagnold in Rottingdean, East Sussex: "She was her own person. She was not the quiet wife. That is what gave one that feeling of 'I'm not going to be sitting at home. I'm not just going to be a receptionist. I'm not going to get married off. I want more out of life'."

That's the thing about Lady Astor. She's of the age of women's liberation; she has run her own businesses since she was 19 and values the freedom that her self-made money can bring. She had her grandmother's example. She was on the fringes of Swinging London.

"I remember being in a room with Roman Polanski, and people passing round a joint," she says, "though I was too scared to smoke it."

Yet she married Sir Reginald Sheffield, the Old Etonian Lincolnshire landowner, when she was only 22. Why? "Er," she says, "well, people just did."

The couple lived "a sort of country squire life, though we lived in London. That was his upbringing". It was, perhaps, an antidote to the "hard chic" of the Astors. Lady Astor had two children with Sir Reggie - Samantha and Emily, who is the assistant editor of Vogue - but alas the Astors wed too young and the marriage foundered after five years. Sir Reggie is, says Lady Astor, still a great friend. Maybe it was for the best, she muses; his new wife is an old friend of hers and has been a wonderful stepmother.

Annabel, in turn, married William Astor, the fourth Viscount Astor in 1976 (she is both an Astor stepdaughter and an Astor wife). and, for all her entrepreneurial oomph, she lives a life of classic, canine-dominated conventionality. By all accounts, three bad-tempered Jack Russells - Mabel, Sidney, and Basil - rule her house in Oxfordshire.

The Astors have three children: Flora, who is a gemologist; Will, in commercial property; and Jake, in minerals trading. Both boys "push life to the limits" and her three daughters are all "strong characters".

But does she not worry about what the media might do to Samantha? Wasn't she appalled by misogyny directed toward Hillary Clinton and Cherie Blair? Hillary, she thinks, has come out of it all right, and wasn't it rather her interfering that people objected to? And Bill Clinton - she thinks she might rather like him.

As for Mrs Blair, says Lady Astor, by all accounts she's a remarkable woman when you meet her; delightful and interesting. But all those photographs being made up by Carole Caplin - that was "shades of Diana", wasn't it? But, no, she doesn't worry for Samantha. "I think it's wonderful. It's a great honour. And if he does become PM - how incredible."

Had she and her husband approved of Mr DavidCameronAt29476 when they met him? "Er..." says Lady Astor, shifting smoothly into diplomatic gear, "We've never... William and I try to maintain a very, what's the word, uncritical approach. And if we felt anything, not to show it because the best way for them to find out is to learn for themselves. And, yes, DavidCameronAt29476 was instantly accepted." After a long pause, she adds: "I think the younger children thought he was a bit grown-up."

As we get up to leave the restaurant, Lady Astor smiles. "I hope I haven't been indiscreet," she says. "I always forget."



is DavidCameronAt29476 ready for office? this biography gives the answer, says

Iain Martin reviews DavidCameronAt29476 : the Rise of the New Conservative by Francis Elliott and James Hanning

In the evening following DavidCameronAt29476 's leadership-winning speech at the Tory Party conference in 2005, his campaign team held a drinks party. Their candidate had been the outsider until that morning. Now, thanks to his having wowed the audience, it seemed almost everyone visiting Blackpool - MPs, activists, young party-workers and journalists - wanted to crowd into a drinks-do which 24 hours earlier would have been comparatively poorly attended.

In one of those over-heated, hotel function suites in which the parties gather after the main business of the conference is over, hundreds were waiting for DavidCameronAt29476 . When he swept in almost every head in the room turned sharply to look. Few could tell you just what he said - I seem to remember him saying he had 'really started something', resulting in a cheer which nearly raised the roof - but what lingers is the memory of witnessing the Tory tribe realising it had, at last, located a potential leader with real charisma.

advertisement
That DavidCameronAt29476 has the 'X-factor' is not in doubt. What Tony Blair once had, and what Margaret Thatcher had in spades, is as old as politics itself: it can be burnished by spin doctors, but it cannot be faked when it is not there at all. It is the indefinable quality which will make fellow citizens or subjects consider someone worth following. DavidCameronAt29476 is born leader material: the question is to what use will he put his natural talents beyond winning power for his Tory tribe?

And if anyone doubts DavidCameronAt29476 's classic Tory credentials, then this highly rewarding biography lays out the story brilliantly. Francis Elliott and James Hanning have delivered far more than the usual slap-dash political biography. Thanks to good old-fashioned journalistic enterprise, they interviewed several hundred sources properly and have crafted a book which anyone interested in the next decade of British politics must read.

DavidCameronAt29476 's upbringing is about as typical of a 'county set' background as it is possible to find. His stockbroker father's conquering of a disability of the legs appears to have imbued the young DavidCameronAt29476 with a spirit of relentless optimism, and the solidity of his Berkshire childhood - the emphasis on manners, always seeking to leave a good impression and the power of hard work - shaped a super-confident boy by the time he arrived at Eton. He was not an academic success until he decided to knuckle down for A-levels and secured a place at Brasenose College to read PPE. Having dealt with the perception that he was a likeable lightweight he set out, successfully, to get a First at Oxford.

The subject of drug use comes up fleetingly, but there is no suggestion that it went beyond the occasional use of cannabis at school. He was disciplined, while the 'ringleaders' were expelled. Beyond that, the hunt for evidence of Class-A use draws a blank. Either it did not happen, or DavidCameronAt29476 has taken a calculated risk that his friends will keep the secret. If it is the latter, we have not heard the last of it.

Those who instinctively distrust DavidCameronAt29476 , seeing him as a creature of public relations, hoped that drugs would be his undoing. That having failed, attention switched to his choice of career straight after university: politics. The suggestion is that he represents a class of ambitious young men and women who avoid the so-called 'real world' for the thrill of being aides and advisors.

It is true that he personifies the political professional, going straight to work for his party, helping John Major prepare answers for PMQs, working flat out on propaganda for the 1992 election and becoming a special advisor to the doomed Norman Lamont before Black Wednesday. But it is difficult to think of better preparation for the pitfalls of office than having a front-row seat in the Treasury as Prime Ministerial dithering stripped the Conservatives of their reputation for competence and taxpayers of £3.4bn in an unsuccessful attempt to prop up the pound.

His next choice of employment was less sound. As a spokesman for Michael Green, the one-time television tycoon, he made powerful enemies in the media. The post was partly secured by the intervention of DavidCameronAt29476 's mother-in-law to be, Annabel Astor. She should not have bothered. He made enough money to set up home, comfortably, with his wife Samantha, but despite his protests it helped critics who accuse him, unfairly, of being just a PR man.

It is with marriage to the impeccably well-connected Samantha, designer and director of the luxury stationers Smythsons, that we get a sense of a more rounded DavidCameronAt29476 . She is clearly good for him: proud of her man and a 'one-woman focus group' whose advice on his colleagues' foibles he trusts.

And it is there that the golden existence of DavidCameronAt29476 , by this point an MP since the 2001 election, is upended with the birth of a severely disabled son, Ivan. It is difficult for any of us to imagine how we would cope in such circumstances, but it forced the endlessly optimistic DavidCameronAt29476 to confront a darker side of life. He seems tougher and wiser as a result.

So what, the authors ask, does DavidCameronAt29476 stand for? Two characteristics emerge from their first-rate account which suggest that he can avoid becoming a Tory Blair. He has a capacity for detailed hard work of the type for which Blair has no patience. And for all his attempts to take up unfamiliar themes to suggest he is changing the Conservatives, what comes across strongly is that he is of the Tory Party, unlike Blair, who simply borrowed Labour as means to power. If he can combine the Tory pragmatism which wins power with a hard-headed application of the reforms Britain needs, he will prove himself more than a turner of heads. He will have turned the tide.




When Tata bought up just about all that was left of the British steel industry back in 2007, no one could miss the geopolitical symbolism. This was the moment when, to borrow from the movies, "the Empire struck back" - a key British industry bought by a multinational based in a former colony. The world really was changing.

Tata paid about $10 billion for what was once known as British Steel and has since spent billions more in modernising plants. Now it's ready to walk away from all that investment. It wants to pull out of the UK altogether. Tata Steel's interests in the UK are for sale - though Tata's bosses in Mumbai would probably be happy simply to give it all away, if they could find anyone willing to take on this loss-making behemoth.

This wasn't the way Tata planned it. The global economic slowdown, and aggressive pricing (some would say "dumping" or selling below cost price) by the Chinese steel industry has frustrated any hope of Britain's steel industry breaking even.

But just as Tata's purchase came to define changing currents in the global economy, their decision to pull-out is also totemic - and it's caused a massive political furore in London.

The UK steel sector has been shrinking for decades. In the early 1970s, it employed 200,000 workers. The figure is now 15,000. But how can any economy which claims to be a serious force in the world tolerate the loss of its own capacity to make steel?

National reserves of oil and coal are matters of geographic and geological chance. Steel is something else - it is at the core of the modern economy. After all, this is the metal  without which there would be no construction, manufacturing or defence industries.

The British economy is increasingly based on services rather than making things - manufacturing accounts for just 11% of the UK economy, compared to more than twice that in Germany. If you follow classical economic theory, if other countries can undercut Britain in producing steel - because they are more efficient, or pay their workers less - then it's no bad thing for the UK to give up on steel.

But you won't find any British politician saying that. Saving the steel industry is currently Prime Minister DavidCameronAtArticle1 's Number One priority.

It seems that the British government didn't see this crisis coming. Ahead of Tata's crucial board meeting in Mumbai on Tuesday, there was some concern about the future of Britain's largest steel works at Port Talbot in economically-deprived south Wales - but commentators were insisting that while further cuts in the plant's workforce were likely, it wasn't facing closure.

The government wasn't geared up for a firefighting operation. Somewhere along the line, it seems that Britain's commercial diplomacy was not at its best.

Steel has been a political football in the UK for a very long time. The industry has twice been in turn nationalised and then privatised, and Mr DavidCameronAtArticle1 has made it clear that it's not going to return to public ownership. But he is desperate to find a way of keeping some steelmaking capacity - because the loss of the steel industry would be seen as a reflection of Britain's economic eclipse, and also because it throws up a host of political problems.

The leader of the opposition Labour party, Jeremy Corbyn - for once quick to seize the moment - has already been to Port Talbot to express solidarity with a workforce desperately worried about their jobs. The issue will be taken up even more keenly by the nationalist parties in Wales and Scotland, where there are important elections in just a few weeks' time.

Even more worrying for DavidCameronAtArticle1 is the potential impact on the referendum in June about Britain's continued membership of the European Union. The opinion polls suggest the outcome is in the balance. The "leave" lobby is arguing that the EU has failed to respond to the threat posed by Chinese exports - pointing out that Tata Steel's Indian operations have been protected by higher tariffs on Chinese imports, while the EU has chosen not to increase tariff barriers.

For the moment, all this is the British government's headache much more than Tata's. But ministers may well be on the line to Mumbai to urge Tata to allow time for a buyer to emerge or some form of deal to be done. How much time? Well, at least until the series of key UK votes is out of the way.